Awesome Learn Gamedev — Art and Technical Art Resources

This list is aimed at learning the craft of game development. Nearly all resources are free, and anything with a price tag will be clearly marked. Paid resources are only included if they have been personally endorsed by an industry professional working in the relevant discipline.

Disclaimer: Most resources are geared towards tech and art.

---

General

"The Door Problem" - A one-sentence summary of most major roles in a large studio, and a bigger explanation of a game designer's job.

GameDev Contacts - A huge list of professional game developers you can contact for advice. Be courteous — these are real people.

FOSS GameDev - A list of Free and Open Source Software for every aspect of gamedev.

---

Programming (Engine and Tools Relevant to Artists)

How Game Engines Work - A blog and video explaining the game engine, or a tool/framework used to create games.

Complete Godot 4 Game Developer by GameDev.tv - A fantastic way to learn Godot, a free and open source game engine. GameDev.tv are an invaluable resource for learning game engines and tools. They are more than worth the $15.

Unreal Engine 5 C++ Developer by GameDev.tv - Same as above, but with Unreal 5, a popular and powerful game engine. Wait for it to go on sale.

Complete Unity Game Developer by GameDev.tv - Unity has been a long-standing champion in the industry, particularly in the mobile/AR/VR space.

Tool Dev - An introduction to tool development and editor scripting in Unity by Freya Holmér.

Math for Game Devs - A primer on math geared towards game development by Freya Holmér.

---

Technical Art

Tech Art Learning Resources - A list of tech art resources, communities, and professionals, curated by Heart Machine (the studio that made Hyper Light Drifter and now Hyper Light Breaker).

Tech Artists - A community of tech artists.

Making Crash Bandicoot - A blog post series from a developer of Crash Bandicoot discussing its rendering tech and the hardware limitations of the PS1.

Proc Gen / HyperDec - An extended breakdown of the procedural art tools of Hyper Light Breaker.

---

Shaders

Shaders for Game Devs - An introduction to HLSL Shaders using Unity by Freya Holmér. Best for beginners.

The Book of Shaders - A book on GLSL pixel shaders. Highly recommended.

Catlike Coding - Unity and HLSL Shader Tutorials.

Shadertoy - An online shader editor and hosting/sharing site.

Render Doc - A program that breaks down a frame rendered from a game and allows you to analyze the processes that created it.

Intro to Shader Graph - A detailed introduction to shader graph in Unity.

Shaderquest - A guide series from a blog about tech art.

---

VFX

Getting Started in Real Time VFX - Also check out the rest of realtimevfx.com to find a thriving community filled with useful knowledge.

VFX Talks Playlist - A playlist of VFX talks at GDC. The linked video is about Diablo and is very insightful.

BiteyCastle Academy 2DFX Animation Course - A full 2D FX animation course, completely free.

Houdini Isnt Scary - Part 1: Basics - A playlist of a Houdini tutorial series.

---

Art

Art Industry Resources - A megalist of art resources.

Saint11: Tutorials and Articles - Fantastic pixel art animation tutorials and articles on pixel art. Most content is free.

Pixel Art Class - A tutorial series covering the basics of art aimed at pixel artists.

Genevieve Routhier - A blog on art direction and leadership from a senior art director.

The Gnomon Workshop - Extremely professional art, animation, and VFX courses. Aimed at film with large overlap in games. Beware of hefty price tag.

Smithsonian Open Access - A massive repository of 3D and 2D digital resources from the Smithsonian Institute archives, such as photos and 3D scans of historical objects. Perfect for reference and creative commons reuse.

Ultimate Commission Guide for Artists - If you want to open yourself up for commission work, this is a godsend.

A whole lot of time-saving tools - Includes Pureref, a reference tool.

---

2D / Illustration

How To Draw - A webcomic on how to draw, and more importantly, how to learn to draw. Best for beginners.

Radiorunner's Curriculum for the Solo Artist - A curriculum for self-teaching art. If you want to really hone your skills, this will undoubtedly be worth your time.

DrawABox - An exhaustive course for the art fundamentals, completely free. Best for beginners.

LoSpec - A pixel art gold mine with job board, palette database, tutorials, and resources.

Proko Figure Drawing Fundamentals - An exhaustive series on drawing people from a reputable channel.

How to Learn Digital Painting (Beginners) - A guide to digital painting for beginners and intermediate painters.

Drawing the Head and Hands - A book on figure construction by Andrew Loomis. Free in the public domain.

Figure Drawing for All its Worth - A book on figure drawing by Andrew Loomis. Free in the public domain.

Digital Inking Tips - A good guide to sharpening your technical skills.

Lines and Edges - A style guide for using edges and lines effectively.

---

3D

World Building in Blender by Ian Hubert - Possibly the best resource for thinking about 3D art, ever. Best for beginners.

Sculpting in Blender - A short, free course on sculpting in Blender.

Photorealism Explained - An explanation of photorealism and how it is achieved in CG.

Realtime Hair Tutorial - A course delving into a hair pipeline for characters.

Royalty-Free Textures, Models, HDRIs, and Assets - Free resources for 3D artists.

---

Animation

The Animator's Survival Kit - An essential resource for any animator. Has a price tag, but if you want to get a job in industry, it is well worth the money.

The 12 Principles of Animation - A visual tutorial series on a fundamental part of animation. Best for beginners.

---

Resources for Non-Artists

Open Game Art - Royalty free game art.

Game Icons - Free game icons.

Low-Poly Models - Free low-poly 3D models.

100% free assets - A post and thread with lots of free art assets and tools.

---

Marketing and Business (Relevant to Indie Artists)

Leveling the Playing Field - A blog and newsletter by Rami Ismail with advice on business, marketing, skill development, and various topics needed to run an indie studio. Recommended starting point: "Budget Viability."

How to Market a Game - A blog and collection of resources by Chris Zukowski with advice on marketing and sales. Recommended starting points: "Empathizing with Steam: How People Shop for Your Game" and "What to Write So People Buy: Selling Your Game Without Feeling Sleazy."

Community Dev Newsletter and Blog - A blog and newsletter by Victoria Tran with advice on community management, social media, and marketing. Recommended starting points: "Failure Marketing" and "Charm your Communities."

---

Job Hunting and Career (Art-Focused)

Video Game Job Hunt - A huge list of job-hunting resources, from building a portfolio and resume to searching for and applying to jobs and salary negotiation.

Guide to Game Art Applications - A guide to game art portfolios and job hunting.

Industry Portfolios - A big list of portfolios from industry professionals.

---

Other

A series of game jam post-mortems - More valuable than they let on, because they show you the whole game-making process, start to finish. This will help you avoid common pitfalls and know how to follow that process for your own game. Watch a couple before entering your first jam or starting your first project.

Game Developer (previously known as Gamasutra) - A site filled with post-mortems, gamedev news, blog posts, and other articles with a focus on game developers and their communities.

Where the Water Tastes Like Wine Postmortem - A must-read for aspiring independent game developers. Making money from the art is hard, even for industry veterans, but there are other things that are valuable.